Adam was the father of Seth, Seth was the father of Enosh, Enosh the father of Kenan,

Kenan the father of Mahalalel, Mahalalel the father of Jared.


The Philistines fought a battle against the Israelites on Mount Gilboa.


All the people of Israel went to David at Hebron and said to him, "We are your own flesh and blood.


David was living in Ziklag, where he had gone to escape from King Saul.


King David consulted with all the officers in command of units of a thousand men and units of a hundred men.


King Hiram of Tyre sent a trade mission to David; he provided him with cedar logs and with stonemasons and carpenters to build a palace.


For his own use, David built houses in David's City.


They took the Covenant Box to the tent which David had prepared for it and put it inside.


King David was now living in his palace.


Some time later King David attacked the Philistines again and defeated them.


Some time later King Nahash of Ammon died, and his son Hanun became king.


Jacob had twelve sons: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Zebulun,




Dan, Joseph, Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.


The following spring, at the time of the year when kings usually go to war, Joab led out the army and invaded the land of Ammon; King David, however, stayed in Jerusalem.


Satan wanted to bring trouble on the people of Israel, so he made David decide to take a census.


So David said, "This is where the Temple of the Lord God will be.


When David was very old, he made his son Solomon king of Israel.


These are the groups to which the descendants of Aaron belong.


King David and the leaders of the Levites chose the following Levite clans to lead the worship services: Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun.


These are the assignments of work for the Levites who served as Temple guards.


This is the list of the Israelite heads of families and clan leaders and their officials who administered the work of the kingdom.


King David commanded all the officials of Israel to assemble in Jerusalem.


King David announced to the whole assembly: "My son Solomon is the one whom God has chosen, but he is still young and lacks experience.


The following, in order of age, are David's sons who were born while he was in Hebron: Amnon, whose mother was Ahinoam from Jezreel Daniel, whose mother was Abigail from Carmel Absalom, whose mother was Maacah, daughter of King Talmai of Geshur Adonijah, whose mother was Haggith Shephatiah, whose mother was Abital Ithream, whose mother was Eglah




All six were born in Hebron during the seven and a half years that David ruled there.


These are some of the descendants of Judah: Perez, Hezron, Carmi, Hur, and Shobal.


These are the descendants of Reuben, the oldest of Jacob's sons.


Levi had three sons: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.


Issachar had four sons: Tola, Puah, Jashub, and Shimron.


Benjamin had five sons.


All the people of Israel were listed according to their families, and this information was recorded in [The Book of the Kings of Israel.]


King David was now a very old man, and although his servants covered him with blankets, he could not keep warm.


The queen of Sheba heard of Solomon's fame,  and she traveled to Jerusalem to test him with difficult questions.


Solomon loved many foreign women.


Rehoboam went to Shechem, where all the people of northern Israel had gathered to make him king.


At the Lord's command a prophet from Judah went to Bethel and arrived there as Jeroboam stood at the altar to offer the sacrifice.


At that time King Jeroboam's son Abijah got sick.


In the eighteenth year of the reign of King Jeroboam of Israel, Abijah became king of Judah,




and he ruled three years in Jerusalem.


The Lord spoke to the prophet Jehu son of Hanani and gave him this message for Baasha:




"You were a nobody, but I made you the leader of my people Israel.


A prophet named Elijah, from Tishbe in Gilead, said to King Ahab, "In the name of the Lord, the living God of Israel, whom I serve, I tell you that there will be no dew or rain for the next two or three years until I say so."


After some time, in the third year of the drought, the Lord said to Elijah, "Go and present yourself to King Ahab, and I will send rain."


King Ahab told his wife Jezebel everything that Elijah had done and how he had put all the prophets of Baal to death.


When David was about to die, he called his son Solomon and gave him his last instructions:




"My time to die has come.


King Benhadad of Syria gathered all his troops, and supported by thirty-two other rulers with their horses and chariots, he marched up, laid siege to Samaria, and launched attacks against it.


Near King Ahab's palace in Jezreel there was a vineyard owned by a man named Naboth.


There was peace between Israel and Syria for the next two years,




but in the third year King Jehoshaphat of Judah went to see King Ahab of Israel.


Solomon made an alliance with the king of Egypt by marrying his daughter.


Solomon was king of all Israel,




and these were his high officials:  The priest: Azariah son of Zadok




The court secretaries: Elihoreph and Ahijah, sons of Shisha  In charge of the records: Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud




Commander of the army: Benaiah son of Jehoiada  Priests: Zadok and Abiathar




Chief of the district governors: Azariah son of Nathan  Royal Adviser: the priest Zabud son of Nathan




In charge of the palace servants: Ahishar  In charge of the forced labor: Adoniram son of Abda




Solomon appointed twelve men as district governors in Israel.


King Hiram of Tyre had always been a friend of David's, and when he heard that Solomon had succeeded his father David as king, he sent ambassadors to him.


Four hundred and eighty years after the people of Israel left Egypt, during the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the second month, the month of Ziv, Solomon began work on the Temple.


Solomon also built a palace for himself, and it took him thirteen years.


Then King Solomon summoned all the leaders of the tribes and clans of Israel to come to him in Jerusalem in order to take the Lord's Covenant Box from Zion, David's City, to the Temple.


After King Solomon had finished building the Temple and the palace and everything else he wanted to build,




the Lord appeared to him again, as he had in Gibeon.


There was a man named Elkanah, from the tribe of Ephraim, who lived in the town of Ramah in the hill country of Ephraim.


Then Samuel took a jar of olive oil and poured it on Saul's head, kissed him, and said, "The Lord anoints you as ruler of his people Israel.


About a month later King Nahash of Ammon led his army against the town of Jabesh in the territory of Gilead and besieged it.


Then Samuel said to the people of Israel, "I have done what you asked me to do.




Saul picked three thousand men, keeping two thousand of them with him in Michmash and in the hill country of Bethel and sending one thousand with his son Jonathan to Gibeah, in the territory of the tribe of Benjamin.


One day Jonathan said to the young man who carried his weapons, "Let's go across to the Philistine camp."


Samuel said to Saul, "I am the one whom the Lord sent to anoint you king of his people Israel.


The Lord said to Samuel, "How long will you go on grieving over Saul?


The Philistines gathered for battle in Socoh, a town in Judah; they camped at a place called Ephes Dammim, between Socoh and Azekah.


Saul and David finished their conversation.


Saul told his son Jonathan and all his officials that he planned to kill  David.


Hannah prayed: 1  "The Lord has filled my heart with joy; how happy I am because of what he has done!


Then David fled from Naioth in Ramah and went to Jonathan.


David went to the priest Ahimelech in Nob.


David fled from the city of Gath and went to a cave near the town of Adullam.


David heard that the Philistines were attacking the town of Keilah and were stealing the newly harvested grain.


When Saul came back from fighting the Philistines, he was told that David was in the wilderness near Engedi.


Samuel died, and all the Israelites came together and mourned for him.


Some men from Ziph came to Saul at Gibeah and told him that David was hiding on Mount Hachilah at the edge of the Judean wilderness.


David said to himself, "One of these days Saul will kill me.


Some time later the Philistines gathered their troops to fight Israel, and Achish said to David, "Of course you understand that you and your men are to fight on my side."


The Philistines brought all their troops together at Aphek, while the Israelites camped at the spring in Jezreel Valley.


In those days, when the boy Samuel was serving the Lord under the direction of Eli, there were very few messages from the Lord, and visions from him were quite rare.


Two days later David and his men arrived back at Ziklag.


The Philistines fought a battle against the Israelites on Mount Gilboa.


At that time the Philistines gathered to go to war against Israel, so  the Israelites set out to fight them.


After the Philistines captured the Covenant Box, they carried it from Ebenezer to their city of Ashdod,




took it into the temple of their god Dagon, and set it up beside his statue.


After the Lord's Covenant Box had been in Philistia for seven months,




the people called the priests and the magicians and asked, "What shall we do with the Covenant Box of the Lord?


So the people of Kiriath Jearim got the Lord's Covenant Box and took it to the house of a man named Abinadab, who lived on a hill.


When Samuel grew old, he made his sons judges in Israel.


There was a wealthy and influential man named Kish, from the tribe of Benjamin; he was the son of Abiel and grandson of Zeror, and belonged to the family of Becorath, a part of the clan of Aphiah.


Solomon, the son of King David, took firm control of the kingdom of Israel, and the Lord his God blessed him and made him very powerful.


Rehoboam went to Shechem, where all the people of northern Israel had gathered to make him king.


When King Rehoboam arrived in Jerusalem, he called together 180,000 of the best soldiers from the tribes of Benjamin and Judah.


As soon as Rehoboam had established his authority as king, he and all his people abandoned the Law of the Lord.


In the eighteenth year of the reign of King Jeroboam of Israel, Abijah became king of Judah,




and he ruled three years in Jerusalem.


King Abijah died and was buried in the royal tombs in David's City.


The spirit of God came upon Azariah son of Oded,




and he went to meet King Asa.


In the thirty-sixth year of the reign of King Asa of Judah, King Baasha of Israel invaded Judah and started to fortify Ramah in order to cut off all traffic in and out of Judah.


Jehoshaphat succeeded his father Asa as king and strengthened his position against Israel.


When King Jehoshaphat of Judah became rich and famous, he arranged a marriage between a member of his family and the family of King Ahab of Israel.


King Jehoshaphat of Judah returned safely to his palace in Jerusalem.


King Solomon decided to build a temple where the Lord would be worshiped, and also to build a palace for himself.


Some time later the armies of Moab and Ammon, together with their allies, the Meunites,  invaded Judah.


Jehoshaphat died and was buried in the royal tombs in David's City and his son Jehoram succeeded him as king.


Some Arabs had led a raid and killed all of King Jehoram's sons except Ahaziah, the youngest.


After waiting six years Jehoiada the priest decided that it was time to take action.


Joash became king of Judah at the age of seven, and he ruled in Jerusalem for forty years.


Amaziah became king at the age of twenty-five, and he ruled in Jerusalem for twenty-nine years.


All the people of Judah chose Amaziah's sixteen-year-old son Uzziah to succeed his father as king




(It was after the death of Amaziah that Uzziah recaptured Elath and rebuilt the city.)


Jotham became king at the age of twenty-five, and he ruled in Jerusalem for sixteen years.


Ahaz became king at the age of twenty, and he ruled in Jerusalem for sixteen years.


Hezekiah became king of Judah at the age of twenty-five, and he ruled in Jerusalem for twenty-nine years.


King David, Solomon's father, had already prepared a place for the Temple.


The people had not been able to celebrate the Passover Festival at the proper time in the first month, because not enough priests were ritually clean and not many people had assembled in Jerusalem.


After the festival ended, all the people of Israel went to every city in Judah and broke the stone pillars, cut down the symbols of the goddess Asherah, and destroyed the altars and the pagan places of worship.


After these events, in which King Hezekiah served the Lord faithfully, Sennacherib, the emperor of Assyria, invaded Judah.


Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king of Judah, and he ruled in Jerusalem for fifty-five years.


Josiah was eight years old when he became king of Judah, and he ruled in Jerusalem for thirty-one years.


King Josiah celebrated the Passover at Jerusalem in honor of the Lord; on the fourteenth day of the first month they killed the animals for the festival.


The people of Judah chose Josiah's son Joahaz and anointed him king in Jerusalem.


King Solomon had a bronze altar made, which was 30 feet square and 15 feet high.


When King Solomon finished all the work on the Temple, he placed in the Temple storerooms all the things that his father David had dedicated to the Lord - the silver, gold, and other articles.


Then King Solomon prayed,  "Lord, you have chosen to live in clouds and darkness.


When King Solomon finished his prayer, fire came down from heaven and burned up the sacrifices that had been offered, and the dazzling light of the Lord's presence filled the Temple.


It took Solomon twenty years to build the Temple and his palace.


The queen of Sheba heard of King Solomon's fame, and she traveled to Jerusalem to test him with difficult questions.


After the death of King Ahab of Israel the country of Moab rebelled against Israel.


There were seventy descendants of King Ahab living in the city of Samaria.


As soon as King Ahaziah's mother Athaliah learned of her son's murder, she gave orders for all the members of the royal family to be killed.


In the seventh year of the reign of King Jehu of Israel, Joash became king of Judah, and he ruled in Jerusalem for forty years.


In the twenty-third year of the reign of Joash son of Ahaziah as king of Judah, Jehoahaz son of Jehu became king of Israel, and he ruled in Samaria for seventeen years.


In the second year of the reign of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz as king of Israel, Amaziah son of Joash became king of Judah




at the age of twenty-five, and he ruled in Jerusalem for twenty-nine years.


In the twenty-seventh year of the reign of King Jeroboam II of Israel, Uzziah son of Amaziah became king of Judah




at the age of sixteen, and he ruled in Jerusalem for fifty-two years.


In the seventeenth year of the reign of Pekah son of Remaliah as king of Israel, Ahaz son of Jotham became king of Judah




at the age of twenty, and he ruled in Jerusalem for sixteen years.


In the twelfth year of the reign of King Ahaz of Judah, Hoshea son of Elah became king of Israel, and he ruled in Samaria for nine years.


In the third year of the reign of Hoshea son of Elah as king of Israel, Hezekiah son of Ahaz became king of Judah




at the age of twenty-five, and he ruled in Jerusalem for twenty-nine years.


As soon as King Hezekiah heard their report, he tore his clothes in grief, put on sackcloth, and went to the Temple of the Lord.


The time came for the Lord to take Elijah up to heaven in a whirlwind.


About this time King Hezekiah became sick and almost died.


Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king of Judah, and he ruled in Jerusalem for fifty-five years.


Josiah was eight years old when he became king of Judah, and he ruled in Jerusalem for thirty-one years.


King Josiah summoned all the leaders of Judah and Jerusalem,




and together they went to the Temple, accompanied by the priests and the prophets and all the rest of the people, rich and poor alike.


While Jehoiakim was king, King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylonia invaded Judah, and for three years Jehoiakim was forced to submit to his rule; then he rebelled.


Zedekiah rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylonia, and so Nebuchadnezzar came with all his army and attacked Jerusalem on the tenth day of the tenth month of the ninth year of Zedekiah's reign.


In the eighteenth year of the reign of King Jehoshaphat of Judah, Joram son of Ahab became king of Israel, and he ruled in Samaria for twelve years.


The widow of a member of a group of prophets went to Elisha and said, "Sir, my husband has died!


Naaman, the commander of the Syrian army, was highly respected and esteemed by the king of Syria, because through Naaman the Lord had given victory to the Syrian forces.


One day the group of prophets that Elisha was in charge of complained to him, "The place where we live is too small!


Elisha answered, "Listen to what the Lord says!


Now Elisha had told the woman who lived in Shunem, whose son he had brought back to life, that the Lord was sending a famine on the land, which would last for seven years, and that she should leave with her family and go and live somewhere else.


Meanwhile the prophet Elisha called one of the young prophets and said to him, "Get ready and go to Ramoth in Gilead.


After Saul's death David came back from his victory over the Amalekites and stayed in Ziklag for two days.


Some time later King Nahash of Ammon died, and his son Hanun became king.


The following spring, at the time of the year when kings usually go to war, David sent out Joab with his officers and the Israelite army; they defeated the Ammonites and besieged the city of Rabbah.


The Lord sent the prophet Nathan to David.


David's son Absalom had a beautiful unmarried sister named Tamar.


Joab knew that King David missed Absalom very much,




so he sent for a clever woman who lived in Tekoa.


After this, Absalom provided a chariot and horses for himself, and an escort of fifty men.


When David had gone a little beyond the top of the hill, he was suddenly met by Ziba, the servant of Mephibosheth, who had with him a couple of donkeys loaded with two hundred loaves of bread, a hundred bunches of raisins, a hundred bunches of fresh fruit, and a leather bag full of wine.


Not long after that, Ahithophel said to Absalom, "Let me choose twelve thousand men, and tonight I will set out after David.


King David brought all his men together, divided them into units of a thousand and of a hundred, and placed officers in command of them.


Joab was told that King David was weeping and mourning for Absalom.


After this, David asked the Lord, "Shall I go and take control of one of the towns of Judah?"


There happened to be in Gilgal a worthless character named Sheba son of Bikri, of the tribe of Benjamin.


During David's reign there was a severe famine which lasted for three full years.


When the Lord saved David from Saul and his other enemies, David sang this song to the Lord:




The Lord is my protector; he is my strong fortress.


David son of Jesse was the man whom God made great, whom the God of Jacob chose to be king, and who was the composer of beautiful songs for Israel.


On another occasion the Lord was angry with Israel, and he made David bring trouble on them.


The fighting between the forces supporting Saul's family and those supporting David went on for a long time.


When Saul's son Ishbosheth heard that Abner had been killed in Hebron, he was afraid, and all the people of Israel were alarmed.


Then all the tribes of Israel went to David at Hebron and said to him, "We are your own flesh and blood.


Once more David called together the best soldiers in Israel, a total of thirty thousand men,




and led them to Baalah  in Judah, in order to bring from there God's Covenant Box, bearing the name of the Lord Almighty, whose throne is above the winged creatures.


King David was settled in his palace, and the Lord kept him safe from all his enemies.


Some time later King David attacked the Philistines again, defeated them, and ended their control over the land.


One day David asked, "Is there anyone left of Saul's family?


These are the words of Amos, a shepherd from the town of Tekoa.


The Lord says, "The people of Moab have sinned again and again, and for this I will certainly punish them.


People of Israel, listen to this message which the Lord has spoken about you, the entire nation that he brought out of Egypt:




"Of all the nations on earth, you are the only one I have known and cared for.


Listen to this, you women of Samaria, who grow fat like the well-fed cows of Bashan, who mistreat the weak, oppress the poor, and demand that your husbands keep you supplied with liquor!


Listen, people of Israel, to this funeral song which I sing over you:




Virgin Israel has fallen,  Never to rise again!


How terrible it will be for you that have such an easy life in Zion and for you that feel safe in Samaria - you great leaders of this great nation Israel, you to whom the people go for help!


I had a vision from the Sovereign Lord.


I had another vision from the Sovereign Lord.


I saw the Lord standing by the altar.


In the third year that Jehoiakim was king of Judah, King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylonia attacked Jerusalem and surrounded the city.


In the third year that Cyrus was emperor of Persia, a message was revealed to Daniel, who is also called Belteshazzar.


He is  responsible for helping and defending me.


The angel wearing linen clothes said, "At that time the great angel Michael, who guards your people, will appear.


In the second year that Nebuchadnezzar was king, he had a dream.


King Nebuchadnezzar had a gold statue made, ninety feet high and nine feet wide, and he had it set up in the plain of Dura in the province of Babylon.


King Nebuchadnezzar sent the following message to the people of all nations, races, and languages in the world: "Greetings!


One night King Belshazzar invited a thousand noblemen to a great banquet, and they drank wine together.


Darius decided to appoint a hundred and twenty governors to hold office throughout his empire.


In the first year that Belshazzar was king of Babylonia, I had a dream and saw a vision in the night.


In the third year that Belshazzar was king, I saw a second vision.


Darius the Mede, who was the son of Xerxes, ruled over the kingdom of Babylonia.


In this book are the words that Moses spoke to the people of Israel when they were in the wilderness east of the Jordan River.


"Then the Lord said to me, "Cut two stone tablets like the first ones and make a wooden Box to put them in.


"Love the Lord your God and always obey all his laws.


"Here are the laws that you are to obey as long as you live in the land that the Lord, the God of your ancestors, is giving you.


"Prophets or interpreters of dreams may promise a miracle or a wonder,




in order to lead you to worship and serve gods that you have not worshiped before.


"You are the people of the Lord your God.


"At the end of every seventh year you are to cancel the debts of those who owe you money.


"Honor the Lord your God by celebrating Passover in the month of Abib; it was on a night in that month that he rescued you from Egypt.


"Do not sacrifice to the Lord your God cattle or sheep that have any defects; the Lord hates this.


"The priestly tribe of Levi is not to receive any share of land in Israel; instead, they are to live on the offerings and other sacrifices given to the Lord.


"After the Lord your God has destroyed the people whose land he is giving you and after you have taken their cities and houses and settled there, 1



divide the territory into three parts, each with a city that can be easily reached.


we finally turned and went into the desert, on the road to the Gulf of Aqaba, as the Lord had commanded, and we spent a long time wandering about in the hill country of Edom.


"When you go out to fight against your enemies and you see chariots and horses and an army that outnumbers yours, do not be afraid of them.


"Suppose someone is found murdered in a field in the land that the Lord your God is going to give you, and you do not know who killed him.


"If you see an Israelite's cow or sheep running loose, do not ignore it; take it back.


"No man who has been castrated or whose penis has been cut off may be included among the Lord's people.


"Suppose a man marries a woman and later decides that he doesn't want her, because he finds something about her that he doesn't like.


"Suppose two Israelites go to court to settle a dispute, and one is declared innocent and the other guilty.


"After you have occupied the land that the Lord your God is giving you and have settled there,




each of you must place in a basket the first part of each crop that you harvest and you must take it with you to the one place of worship.


Then Moses, together with the leaders of Israel, said to the people, "Obey all the instructions that I am giving you today.


"If you obey the Lord your God and faithfully keep all his commands that I am giving you today, he will make you greater than any other nation on earth.


These are the terms of the covenant that the Lord commanded Moses to make with the people of Israel in the land of Moab; all this was in addition to the covenant which the Lord had made with them at Mount Sinai.


"Next, we moved north toward the region of Bashan, and King Og came out with all his men to fight us near the town of Edrei.


"I have now given you a choice between a blessing and a curse.


Moses continued speaking to the people of Israel,




and said, "I am now a hundred and twenty years old and am no longer able to be your leader.


"Earth and sky, hear my words, listen closely to what I say.


These are the blessings that Moses, the man of God, pronounced on the people of Israel before he died.


Moses went up from the plains of Moab to Mount Nebo, to the top of Mount Pisgah east of Jericho, and there the Lord showed him the whole land: the territory of Gilead as far north as the town of Dan;




the entire territory of Naphtali; the territories of Ephraim and Manasseh; the territory of Judah as far west as the Mediterranean Sea;




the southern part of Judah; and the plain that reaches from Zoar to Jericho, the city of palm trees.


Then Moses said to the people, "Obey all the laws that I am teaching you, and you will live and occupy the land which the Lord, the God of your ancestors, is giving you.


Moses called together all the people of Israel and said to them, "People of Israel, listen to all the laws that I am giving you today.


"These are all the laws that the Lord your God commanded me to teach you.


"The Lord your God will bring you into the land that you are going to occupy, and he will drive many nations out of it.


"Obey faithfully all the laws that I have given you today, so that you may live, increase in number, and occupy the land that the Lord promised to your ancestors.


"Listen, people of Israel!


These are the words of the Philosopher, David's son, who was king in Jerusalem.


Dead flies can make a whole bottle of perfume stink, and a little stupidity can cancel out the greatest wisdom.


Invest your money in foreign trade, and one of these days you will make a profit.


So remember your Creator  while you are still young, before those dismal days and years come when you will say, "I don't enjoy life."


I decided to enjoy myself and find out what happiness is.


Everything that happens in this world happens at the time God chooses.


Then I looked again at all the injustice that goes on in this world.


Be careful about going to the Temple.


I have noticed that in this world a serious injustice is done.


A good reputation is better than expensive perfume; and the day you die is better than the day you are born.


Only the wise know what things really mean.


I thought long and hard about all this and saw that God controls the actions of wise and righteous people, even their love and their hate.


From his royal throne in Persia's capital city of Susa, King Xerxes ruled 127 provinces, all the way from India to Ethiopia.


King Xerxes imposed forced labor on the people of the coastal regions of his empire as well as on those of the interior.


Later, even after the king's anger had cooled down, he kept thinking about what Vashti had done and about his proclamation against her.


Some time later King Xerxes promoted a man named Haman to the position of prime minister.


When Mordecai learned of all that had been done, he tore his clothes in anguish.


On the third day of her fast Esther put on her royal robes and went and stood in the inner courtyard of the palace, facing the throne room.


That same night the king could not get to sleep, so he had the official records of the empire brought and read to him.


And so the king and Haman went to eat with Esther




for a second time.


That same day King Xerxes gave Queen Esther all the property of Haman, the enemy of the Jews.


The thirteenth day of Adar came, the day on which the royal proclamation was to take effect, the day when the enemies of the Jews were hoping to get them in their power.


The sons of Jacob who went to Egypt with him, each with his family, were 1



Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah,




Issachar, Zebulun, Benjamin,




Dan, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.


Then the Lord said to Moses, "Go and see the king.


Then the Lord said to Moses, "I will send only one more punishment on the king of Egypt and his people.


The Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron in Egypt: 1



"This month is to be the first month of the year for you.


The Lord said to Moses,




"Dedicate all the first-born males to me, for every first-born male Israelite and every first-born male animal belongs to me."


Then the Lord said to Moses,




"Tell the Israelites to turn back and camp in front of Pi Hahiroth, between Migdol and the Red Sea, near Baal Zephon.


Then Moses and the Israelites sang this song to the Lord: 1  "I will sing to the Lord, because he has won a glorious victory; he has thrown the horses and their riders into the sea.


The whole Israelite community set out from Elim, and on the fifteenth day of the second month after they had left Egypt, they came to the desert of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai.


The whole Israelite community left the desert of Sin, moving from one place to another at the command of the Lord.


Moses' father-in-law Jethro, the priest of Midian, heard about everything that God had done for Moses and the people of Israel when he led them out of Egypt.


The people of Israel left Rephidim, and on the first day of the third month after they had left Egypt they came to the desert of Sinai.


During this time a man from the tribe of Levi married a woman of his own tribe,




and she bore him a son.


God spoke, and these were his words:




"I am the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt, where you were slaves.


"Give the Israelites the following laws:




If you buy a Hebrew slave, he shall serve you for six years.


"If someone steals a cow or a sheep and kills it or sells it, he must pay five cows for one cow and four sheep for one sheep.


"Do not spread false rumors, and do not help a guilty person by giving false testimony.


The Lord said to Moses, "Come up the mountain to me, you and Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and seventy of the leaders of Israel; and while you are still some distance away, bow down in worship.


The Lord said to Moses,




"Tell the Israelites to make an offering to me.


"Make the interior of the sacred Tent, the Tent of my presence, out of ten pieces of fine linen woven with blue, purple, and red wool.


"Make an altar out of acacia wood.


"Summon your brother Aaron and his sons, Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.


"This is what you are to do to Aaron and his sons to dedicate them as priests in my service.


One day while Moses was taking care of the sheep and goats of his father-in-law Jethro, the priest of Midian, he led the flock across the desert and came to Sinai, the holy mountain.


"Make an altar out of acacia wood, for burning incense.


The Lord said to Moses,




"I have chosen Bezalel, the son of Uri and grandson of Hur, from the tribe of Judah,




and I have filled him with my power.


When the people saw that Moses had not come down from the mountain but was staying there a long time, they gathered around Aaron and said to him, "We do not know what has happened to this man Moses, who led us out of Egypt; so make us a god  to lead us."


The Lord said to Moses, "Leave this place, you and the people you brought out of Egypt, and go to the land that I promised to give to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and to their descendants.


The Lord said to Moses, "Cut two stone tablets like the first ones, and I will write on them the words that were on the first tablets, which you broke.


Moses called together the whole community of the people of Israel and said to them, "This is what the Lord has commanded you to do:




You have six days in which to do your work, but the seventh day is to be sacred, a solemn day of rest dedicated to me, the Lord.


"Bezalel, Oholiab, and all the other workers to whom the Lord has given skill and understanding, who know how to make everything needed to build the sacred Tent, are to make everything just as the Lord has commanded."


Bezalel made the Covenant Box out of acacia wood, 45 inches long, 27 inches wide, and 27 inches high.


For burning offerings, he made an altar out of acacia wood.


With the blue, purple, and red wool they made the magnificent garments which the priests were to wear when they served in the Holy Place.


Then Moses answered the Lord, "But suppose the Israelites do not believe me and will not listen to what I say.


The Lord said to Moses,




"On the first day of the first month set up the Tent of the Lord's presence.


Then Moses and Aaron went to the king of Egypt and said, "The Lord, the God of Israel, says, "Let my people go, so that they can hold a festival in the desert to honor me.'


Then the Lord said to Moses, "Now you are going to see what I will do to the king.


The Lord said, "I am going to make you like God to the king, and your brother Aaron will speak to him as your prophet.


Then the Lord said to Moses, "Go to the king and tell him that the Lord says, "Let my people go, so that they can worship me.


The Lord said to Moses, "Go to the king and tell him that the Lord, the God of the Hebrews, says, "Let my people go, so that they may worship me.


On the fifth day of the fourth month of the thirtieth year, a I, Ezekiel the priest, son of Buzi, was living with the Jewish exiles by the Chebar River in Babylonia.


I looked at the dome over the heads of the living creatures  and above them was something that seemed to be a throne made of sapphire.


God's spirit lifted me up and took me to the east gate of the Temple.


The Lord spoke to me.


The Lord spoke to me.


Some of the leaders of the Israelites came to consult me about the Lord's will.


The Lord spoke to me.


The Lord spoke to me again.


The Lord spoke to me.


The Lord spoke to me




and said, "What is this proverb people keep repeating in the land of Israel?


The Lord told me to sing this song of sorrow for two princes of Israel:




What a lioness your mother was!


saying, "Mortal man, stand up.


It was the tenth day of the fifth month of the seventh year of our exile.


The Lord spoke to me.


The Lord spoke to me.


The Lord spoke to me.


On the tenth day of the tenth month of the ninth year of our exile, the Lord spoke to me.


The Lord spoke to me.


On the first day of the .


The Lord said to me,




"Mortal man, sing a funeral song for Tyre,




that city which stands at the edge of the sea and does business with the people living on every seacoast.


The Lord spoke to me.


On the twelfth day of the tenth month of the tenth year of our exile, the Lord spoke to me.


God said, "Mortal man, eat this scroll; then go and speak to the people of Israel."


The Lord spoke to me again.


On the first day of the third month of the eleventh year of our exile, the Lord spoke to me.


On the first day of the twelfth month of the twelfth year of our exile, the Lord spoke to me.


The Lord spoke to me.


The Lord spoke to me.


The Lord spoke to me.


The Lord said, "Mortal man, speak to the mountains of Israel and tell them to listen to the message which I,




the Sovereign Lord, have for them: Israel's enemies gloated and said, "Now those ancient hills are ours!'


I felt the powerful presence of the Lord, and his spirit took me and set me down in a valley where the ground was covered with bones.


The Lord spoke to me.


The Sovereign Lord said, "Mortal man, denounce Gog, the chief ruler of the nations of Meshech and Tubal, and tell him that I am his enemy.


God said, "Mortal man, get a brick, put it in front of you, and scratch lines on it to represent the city of Jerusalem.


It was the tenth day of the new year, which was the twenty-fifth year after we had been taken into exile and the fourteenth year after Jerusalem was captured.


Next, the man took me into the central room, the Holy Place.


Then the man took me into the outer courtyard and led me to a building on the north side of the Temple, not far from the building at the west end of the Temple.


The man took me to the gate that faces east,




and there I saw coming from the east the dazzling light of the presence of the God of Israel.


The man led me to the outer gate at the east side of the Temple area.


When the land is divided to give each tribe a share, one part is to be dedicated to the Lord.


The Sovereign Lord says, "The east gateway to the inner courtyard must be kept closed during the six working days, but it is to be opened on the Sabbath and at the New Moon Festival.


The man led me back to the entrance of the Temple.


The northern boundary of the land runs eastward from the Mediterranean Sea to the city of Hethlon, to Hamath Pass, to Enon City, to the boundary between the kingdoms of Damascus and Hamath.


The Lord said, "Mortal man, take a sharp sword and use it to shave off your beard and all your hair.


The Lord spoke to me.


The Lord spoke to me.


On the fifth day of the sixth month of the sixth year of our exile, the leaders of the exiles from Judah were sitting in my house with me.


Then I heard God shout, "Come here, you men who are going to punish the city.


In the first year that Cyrus of Persia was emperor, a the Lord made what he had said through the prophet Jeremiah come true.


While Ezra was bowing in prayer in front of the Temple, weeping and confessing these sins, a large group of Israelites - men, women, and children - gathered around him, weeping bitterly.


Many of the exiles left the province of Babylon and returned to Jerusalem and Judah, all to their own hometowns.


By the seventh month the people of Israel were all settled in their towns.


The enemies of the people of Judah and Benjamin heard that those who had returned from exile were rebuilding the Temple of the Lord, the God of Israel.


At that time two prophets, Haggai and Zechariah son of Iddo, began to speak in the name of the God of Israel to the Jews who lived in Judah and Jerusalem.


So Emperor Darius issued orders for a search to be made in the royal records that were kept in Babylon.


Many years later, when Artaxerxes was emperor of Persia, there was a man named Ezra.


This is the list of the heads of the clans who had been in exile in Babylonia and who returned with Ezra to Jerusalem when Artaxerxes was emperor:




Gershom, of the clan of Phinehas.


After all this had been done, some of the leaders of the people of Israel came and told me that the people, the priests, and the Levites had not kept themselves separate from the people in the neighboring countries of Ammon, Moab, and Egypt or from the Canaanites, Hittites, Perizzites, Jebusites, and Amorites.


In the beginning, when God created the universe, a



the earth was formless and desolate.


These are the descendants of Noah's sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.


At first, the people of the whole world had only one language and used the same words.


The Lord said to Abram, "Leave your country, your relatives, and your father's home, and go to a land that I am going to show you.


Abram went north out of Egypt to the southern part of Canaan with his wife and everything he owned, and Lot went with him.


Four kings, Amraphel of Babylonia, Arioch of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer of Elam, and Tidal of Goiim,




went to war against five other kings: Bera of Sodom, Birsha of Gomorrah, Shinab of Admah, Shemeber of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (or Zoar).


After this, Abram had a vision and heard the Lord say to him, "Do not be afraid, Abram.


Abram's wife Sarai had not borne him any children.


When Abram was ninety-nine years old, the Lord appeared to him and said, "I am the Almighty God.


The Lord appeared to Abraham at the sacred trees of Mamre.


When the two angels came to Sodom that evening, Lot was sitting at the city gate.


And so the whole universe was completed.


Abraham moved from Mamre to the southern part of Canaan and lived between Kadesh and Shur.


The Lord blessed Sarah, as he had promised,




and she became pregnant and bore a son to Abraham when he was old.


Some time later God tested Abraham; he called to him, "Abraham!"


Sarah lived to be 127 years old.


Abraham was now very old, and the Lord had blessed him in everything he did.


Abraham married another woman, whose name was Keturah.


There was another famine in the land besides the earlier one during the time of Abraham.


Isaac was now old and had become blind.


Isaac called Jacob, greeted him, and told him, "Don't marry a Canaanite.


Jacob continued on his way and went toward the land of the East.


Now the snake was the most cunning animal that the Lord God had made.


But Rachel had not borne Jacob any children, and so she became jealous of her sister and said to Jacob, "Give me children, or I will die."


Jacob heard that Laban's sons were saying, "Jacob has taken everything that belonged to our father.


As Jacob went on his way, some angels met him.


Jacob saw Esau coming with his four hundred men, so he divided the children among Leah, Rachel, and the two concubines.


One day Dinah, the daughter of Jacob and Leah, went to visit some of the Canaanite women.


God said to Jacob, "Go to Bethel at once, and live there.


These are the descendants of Esau, also called Edom.


Jacob continued to live in the land of Canaan, where his father had lived,




and this is the story of Jacob's family.


About that time Judah left his brothers and went to stay with a man named Hirah, who was from the town of Adullam.


Now the Ishmaelites had taken Joseph to Egypt and sold him to Potiphar, one of the king's officers, who was the captain of the palace guard.


Then Adam had intercourse with his wife, and she became pregnant.


Some time later the king of Egypt's wine steward and his chief baker offended the king.


After two years had passed, the king of Egypt dreamed that he was standing by the Nile River,




when seven cows, fat and sleek, came up out of the river and began to feed on the grass.


When Jacob learned that there was grain in Egypt, he said to his sons, "Why don't you do something?


The famine in Canaan got worse,




and when the family of Jacob had eaten all the grain which had been brought from Egypt, Jacob said to his sons, "Go back and buy a little food for us."


Joseph commanded the servant in charge of his house, "Fill the men's sacks with as much food as they can carry, and put each man's money in the top of his sack.


Joseph was no longer able to control his feelings in front of his servants, so he ordered them all to leave the room.


Jacob packed up all he had and went to Beersheba, where he offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac.


So Joseph took five of his brothers and went to the king.


Some time later Joseph was told that his father was ill.


Jacob called for his sons and said, "Gather around, and I will tell you what will happen to you in the future:




"Come together and listen, sons of Jacob.


This is the list of the descendants of Adam.


Joseph threw himself on his father, crying and kissing his face.


When people had spread all over the world, and daughters were being born, 1



some of the heavenly beings  saw that these young women were beautiful, so they took the ones they liked.


The Lord said to Noah, "Go into the boat with your whole family; I have found that you are the only one in all the world who does what is right.


God had not forgotten Noah and all the animals with him in the boat; he caused a wind to blow, and the water started going down.


God blessed Noah and his sons and said, "Have many children, so that your descendants will live all over the earth.


This is the message that the Lord revealed to the prophet Habakkuk.


I will climb my watchtower and wait to see what the Lord will tell me to say and what answer he  will give to my complaint.


This is a prayer of the prophet Habakkuk:




O Lord, I have heard of what you have done, and I am filled with awe.


During the second year that Darius was emperor of Persia, on the first day of the sixth month, the Lord spoke through the prophet Haggai.


On the twenty-first day of the seventh month of that same year, the Lord spoke again through the prophet Haggai.


This is the message which the Lord gave Hosea son of Beeri during the time that Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah were kings of Judah, and Jeroboam son of Jehoash was king of Israel.


The people of Israel were like a grapevine that was full of grapes.


The Lord says, 1  "When Israel was a child, I loved him and called him out of Egypt as my son.


Everything that the people of Israel do from morning to night is useless and destructive.


In the past, when the tribe of Ephraim spoke, the other tribes of Israel were afraid; they looked up to Ephraim.


Return to the Lord your God, people of Israel.


So call your fellow Israelites "God's People" and "Loved-by-the-Lord."


The Lord said to me, "Go again  and show your love for a woman who is committing adultery with a lover.


The Lord has an accusation to bring against the people who live in this land.


"Listen to this, you priests!


The people say, "Let's return to the Lord!


"Whenever I want to heal my people Israel and make them prosperous again, all I can see is their wickedness and the evil they do.


The Lord says, "Sound the alarm!


People of Israel, stop celebrating your festivals like pagans.


This book contains the messages about Judah and Jerusalem which God revealed to Isaiah son of Amoz during the time when Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah were kings of Judah.


You are doomed!


The royal line of David is like a tree that has been cut down; but just as new branches sprout from a stump, so a new king will arise from among David's descendants.


A day is coming when people will sing, "I praise you, Lord!


This is a message about Babylon, which Isaiah son of Amoz received from God.


The Lord will once again be merciful to his people Israel and choose them as his own.


This is a message about Moab.


From the city of Sela in the desert the people of Moab send a lamb as a present to the one who rules in Jerusalem.


The Lord said, "Damascus will not be a city any longer; it will be only a pile of ruins.


Beyond the rivers of Ethiopia  there is a land where the sound of wings is heard.


This is a message about Egypt.


Here is the message which God gave to Isaiah son of Amoz about Judah and Jerusalem:




In days to come the mountain where the Temple stands will be the highest one of all, towering above all the hills.


Under the orders of Emperor Sargon of Assyria, the commander-in-chief of the Assyrian army attacked the Philistine city of Ashdod.


This is a message about Babylonia.


This is a message about the Valley of Vision.


This is a message about Tyre.


The Lord is going to devastate the earth and leave it desolate.


Lord, you are my God; I will honor you and praise your name.


A day is coming when the people will sing this song in the land of Judah:  Our city is strong!


On that day the Lord will use his powerful and deadly sword to punish Leviathan, that wriggling, twisting dragon, and to kill the monster  that lives in the sea.


The kingdom of Israel is doomed!


God's altar, Jerusalem itself, is doomed!


Now the Lord, the Almighty Lord, is about to take away from Jerusalem and Judah everything and everyone that the people depend on.


The Lord has spoken: "Those who rule Judah are doomed because they rebel against me.


Those who go to Egypt for help are doomed!


Some day there will be a king who rules with integrity, and national leaders who govern with justice.


Our enemies are doomed!


Come, people of all nations!


The desert will rejoice, and flowers will bloom in the wastelands.


In the fourteenth year that Hezekiah was king of Judah, Sennacherib, the emperor of Assyria, attacked the fortified cities of Judah and captured them.


As soon as King Hezekiah heard their report, he tore his clothes in grief, put on sackcloth, and went to the Temple of the Lord.


About this time King Hezekiah became sick and almost died.


About that same time the king of Babylonia, Merodach Baladan, son of Baladan, heard that King Hezekiah had been sick, so he sent him a letter and a present.


When that time comes, seven women will grab hold of one man and say, "We can feed and clothe ourselves, but please let us say you are our husband, so that we won't have to endure the shame of being unmarried."


"Comfort my people," says our God.


God says,  "Be silent and listen to me, you distant lands!


The Lord says, 1  "Here is my servant, whom I strengthen -  the one I have chosen, with whom I am pleased.


Israel, the Lord who created you says, "Do not be afraid - I will save you.


The Lord says,  "Listen now, Israel, my servant, my chosen people, the descendants of Jacob.


The Lord has chosen Cyrus to be king.


"This is the end for Babylon's gods!


The Lord says, 1  "Babylon, come down from your throne, and sit in the dust on the ground.


Listen to this, people of Israel, you that are descended from Judah:  You swear by the name of the Lord and claim to worship the God of Israel -  but you don't mean a word you say.


Listen to me, distant nations, 1 you people who live far away!


Listen while I sing you this song, 1 a song of my friend and his vineyard:  My friend had a vineyard on a very fertile hill.


The Lord says, 1  "Do you think I sent my people away like a man who divorces his wife?


The Lord says,  "Listen to me, you that want to be saved, you that come to me for help.


Jerusalem, be strong and great again!


The people reply, 1  "Who would have believed what we now report?


Jerusalem, you have been like a childless woman, 1 but now you can sing and shout for joy.


The Lord says, 1  "Come, everyone who is thirsty -  here is water!


The Lord says to his people, "Do what is just and right, for soon I will save you.


Good people die, and no one understands or even cares.


The Lord says, "Shout as loud as you can!


Don't think that the Lord is too weak to save you or too deaf to hear your call for help!


In the year that King Uzziah died, I saw the Lord.


Arise, Jerusalem, and shine like the sun;  The glory of the Lord is shining on you!


The Sovereign Lord has filled me with his Spirit.


I will speak out to encourage Jerusalem;  I will not be silent until she is saved,  And her victory shines like a torch in the night.


"Who is this coming from the city of Bozrah in Edom?


Why don't you tear the sky open and come down?


The Lord said, "I was ready to answer my people's prayers, but they did not pray.


The Lord says, "Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool.


When King Ahaz, the son of Jotham and grandson of Uzziah, ruled Judah, war broke out.


The Lord said to me, "Take a large piece of writing material and write on it in large letters:  "Quick Loot, Fast Plunder.'


There will be no way for them to escape from this time of trouble.


This book is the account of what was said by Jeremiah son of Hilkiah, one of the priests of the town of Anathoth in the territory of Benjamin.


People of Israel, listen to the message that the Lord has for you.


The Lord said to me,




"Listen to the terms of the covenant.


"Lord, if I argued my case with you, you would prove to be right.


The Lord told me to go and buy myself some linen shorts and to put them on; but he told me not to put them in water.


The Lord said to me concerning the drought,




"Judah is in mourning; its cities are dying,  its people lie on the ground in sorrow, and Jerusalem cries out for help.


Then the Lord said to me, "Even if Moses and Samuel were standing here pleading with me, I would not show these people any mercy.


Again the Lord spoke to me and said,




"Do not marry or have children in a place like this.


The Lord says, "People of Judah, your sin is written with an iron pen; it is engraved on your hearts with a diamond point and carved on the corners of your altars.


The Lord said to me,




"Go down to the potter's house, where I will give you my message."


The Lord told me to go and buy a clay jar.


The Lord told me




to proclaim this message to everyone in Jerusalem.


When the priest Pashhur son of Immer, who was the chief officer of the Temple, heard me proclaim these things,




he had me beaten and placed in chains near the upper Benjamin Gate in the Temple.


King Zedekiah of Judah sent to me Pashhur son of Malchiah and the priest Zephaniah son of Maaseiah with this request:




"Please speak to the Lord for us, because King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylonia and his army are besieging the city.


The Lord told me to go to the palace of the king of Judah, the descendant of David, and there tell the king, his officials, and the people of Jerusalem to listen to what the Lord had said:




"I, the Lord, command you to do what is just and right.


How terrible will be the Lord's judgment on those rulers who destroy and scatter his people!


The Lord showed me two baskets of figs placed in front of the Temple.


In the fourth year that Jehoiakim son of Josiah was king of Judah, I received a message from the Lord concerning all the people of Judah.


Soon after Jehoiakim son of Josiah became king of Judah, 1



the Lord said to me, "Stand in the court of the Temple and proclaim all I have commanded you to say to the people who come from the towns of Judah to worship there.


Soon after Josiah's son Zedekiah became king of Judah, the Lord told me 1



to make myself a yoke out of leather straps and wooden crossbars and to put it on my neck.


That same year,  in the fifth month of the fourth year that Zedekiah was king, Hananiah son of Azzur, a prophet from the town of Gibeon, spoke to me in the Temple.


I wrote a letter to the priests, the prophets, the leaders of the people, and to all the others whom Nebuchadnezzar had taken away as prisoners from Jerusalem to Babylonia.


The Lord says, "If a man divorces his wife, and she leaves him and becomes another man's wife, he cannot take her back again.


The Lord, the God of Israel,




said to me, "Write down in a book everything that I have told you,




because the time is coming when I will restore my people, Israel and Judah.


The Lord says, "The time is coming when I will be the God of all the tribes of Israel, and they will be my people.


The Lord spoke to me in the tenth year that Zedekiah was king of Judah, which was also the eighteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylonia.


While I was still in prison in the courtyard, the Lord's message came to me again.


The Lord spoke to me when King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylonia and his army, supported by troops from all the nations and races that were subject to him, were attacking Jerusalem and its nearby towns.


When Jehoiakim son of Josiah was king of Judah, the Lord said to me, 1



"Go to the members of the Rechabite clan and talk to them.


In the fourth year that Jehoiakim son of Josiah was king of Judah, the Lord said to me, 1



"Get a scroll and write on it everything that I have told you about Israel and Judah and all the nations.


King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylonia made Zedekiah son of Josiah king of Judah in the place of Jehoiachin son of Jehoiakim.


Shephatiah son of Mattan, Gedaliah son of Pashhur, Jehucal son of Shelemiah, and Pashhur son of Malchiah heard that I was telling the people that




the Lord had said, "Whoever stays on in the city will die in war or of starvation or disease.


In the tenth month of the ninth year that Zedekiah was king of Judah, King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylonia came with his whole army and attacked Jerusalem.


The Lord says, "People of Israel, if you want to turn, then turn back to me.


The Lord spoke to me after Nebuzaradan, the commanding officer, had set me free at Ramah.


In the seventh month of that year, Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah and grandson of Elishama, a member of the royal family and one of the king's chief officers, went to Mizpah with ten men to see Governor Gedaliah.


Then all the army leaders, including Johanan son of Kareah and Azariah  son of Hoshaiah, came with people of every class




and said to me, "Please do what we ask you!


I finished telling the people everything that the Lord their God had sent me to tell them.


The Lord spoke to me concerning all the Israelites living in Egypt, in the cities of Migdol, Tahpanhes, and Memphis, and in the southern part of the country.


In the fourth year that Jehoiakim son of Josiah was king of Judah, Baruch wrote down what I had dictated to him.


The Lord spoke to me about the nations,




beginning with Egypt.


Before the king of Egypt attacked Gaza, the Lord spoke to me about Philistia.


This is what the Lord Almighty said about Moab: 1 "Pity the people of Nebo -  their town is destroyed!


This is what the Lord said about Ammon: "Where are the men of Israel?


People of Jerusalem, run through your streets!


This is the message that the Lord gave me about the city of Babylon and its people: 1



"Tell the news to the nations!


The Lord says, "I am bringing a destructive wind  against Babylonia and its people.


Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king of Judah, and he ruled in Jerusalem for eleven years.


People of Benjamin, run for safety!


The Lord sent me to the gate of the Temple where the people of Judah went in to worship.


"At that time the bones of the kings and of the officials of Judah, as well as the bones of the priests, of the prophets, and of the other people who lived in Jerusalem, will be taken out of their graves.


I wish my head were a well of water, and my eyes a fountain of tears,  so that I could cry day and night for my people who have been killed.


There was a man named Job, living in the land of Uz, a who worshiped God and was faithful to him.


I am tired of living.


Will no one answer all this nonsense?


Yes, you are the voice of the people.


Everything you say, I have heard before.


We are all born weak and helpless.


Empty words, Job!


I have heard words like that before;




the comfort you give is only torment.


The end of my life is near.


Job, can't people like you ever be quiet?


Why do you keep tormenting me




with words?


When the day came for the heavenly beings to appear before the Lord again, Satan was there among them.


Job, you upset me.


Listen to what I am saying;




that is all the comfort I ask from you.


Is there anyone, even the wisest, 1



who could ever be of use to God?


I still rebel and complain against God;




I cannot keep from groaning.


Why doesn't God set a time for judging, a day of justice for those who serve him?


God is powerful; all must stand in awe of him;




he keeps his heavenly kingdom in peace.


What a big help you are to me -




poor, weak man that I am!


I swear by the living Almighty God,




who refuses me justice and makes my life bitter -




as long as God gives me breath,




my lips will never say anything evil, my tongue will never tell a lie.


There are mines where silver is dug;  There are places where gold is refined.


Job began speaking again.


Finally Job broke the silence and cursed the day on which he had been born.


But men younger than I am make fun of me now!


I have made a solemn promise never to look with lust at a woman.


Because Job was convinced of his own innocence, the three men gave up trying to answer him.


And now, Job, listen carefully to all that I have to say.


You men are so wise, so clever; listen now to what I am saying.


It is not right, Job, for you to say that you are innocent in God's sight,




or to ask God, "How does my sin affect you?


Be patient and listen a little longer to what I am saying on God's behalf.


The storm makes my heart beat wildly.


Then out of the storm the Lord spoke to Job.


Do you know when mountain goats are born?


Job, will you be annoyed if I speak?


Job, you challenged Almighty God; will you give up now, or will you answer?


Can you catch Leviathan  with a fishhook 1 or tie his tongue down with a rope?


Then Job answered the Lord.


Call out, Job.


If my troubles and griefs




were weighed on scales,




they would weigh more than the sands of the sea, so my wild words should not surprise you.


Human life is like forced army service, like a life of hard manual labor,




like a slave longing for cool shade; like a worker waiting to be paid.


Are you finally through with your windy speech?


Yes, I've heard all that before.


This is the Lord's message to Joel son of Pethuel.


Blow the trumpet; sound the alarm on Zion, God's sacred hill.


The Lord says,  "At that time I will restore the prosperity of Judah and Jerusalem.


One day the Lord spoke to Jonah son of Amittai.


From deep inside the fish Jonah prayed to the Lord his God:




"In my distress, O Lord, I called to you, and you answered me.


Once again the Lord spoke to Jonah.


Jonah was very unhappy about this and became angry.


After the death of the Lord's servant Moses, the Lord spoke to Moses' helper, Joshua son of Nun.


Adonizedek, the king of Jerusalem,  heard that Joshua had captured and totally destroyed Ai and had killed its king, just as he had done to Jericho and its king.


When the news of Israel's victories reached King Jabin of Hazor, he sent word to King Jobab of Madon, to the kings of Shimron and Achshaph,




and to the kings in the hill country in the north, in the Jordan Valley south of Lake Galilee, in the foothills, and on the coast near Dor.


The people of Israel had already conquered and occupied the land east of the Jordan, from the Arnon Valley up the Jordan Valley and as far north as Mount Hermon.


Joshua was now very old.


What follows is an account of how the land of Canaan west of the Jordan was divided among the people of Israel.


The families of the tribe of Judah received a part of the land described as follows: The land reached south to the southernmost point of the wilderness of Zin, at the border of Edom.


The southern boundary of the land assigned to the descendants of Joseph started from the Jordan near Jericho, at a point east of the springs of Jericho, and went into the desert.


A part of the land west of the Jordan was assigned to some of the families descended from Joseph's older son Manasseh.


After they had conquered the land, the entire community of Israel assembled at Shiloh and set up the Tent of the Lord's presence.


The second assignment made was for the families of the tribe of Simeon.


Then Joshua sent two spies from the camp at Acacia with orders to go and secretly explore the land of Canaan, especially the city of Jericho.


Then the Lord told Joshua 1



to say to the people of Israel, "Choose the cities of refuge that I had Moses tell you about.


The leaders of the Levite families went to Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and to the heads of the families of all the tribes of Israel.


Then Joshua called together the people of the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and East Manasseh.


Much later the Lord gave Israel security from their enemies around them.


Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel together at Shechem.


The next morning Joshua and all the people of Israel got up early, left the camp at Acacia, and went to the Jordan, where they camped while waiting to cross it.


When the whole nation had crossed the Jordan, the Lord said to Joshua,




"Choose twelve men, one from each tribe,




and command them to take twelve stones out of the middle of the Jordan, from the very place where the priests were standing.


All the Amorite kings west of the Jordan and all the Canaanite kings along the Mediterranean Sea heard that the Lord had dried up the Jordan until the people of Israel had crossed it.


The gates of Jericho were kept shut and guarded to keep the Israelites out.


The Lord's command to Israel not to take from Jericho anything that was to be destroyed was not obeyed.


The Lord said to Joshua, "Take all the soldiers with you and go on up to Ai.


The victories of Israel became known to all the kings west of the Jordan - in the hills, in the foothills, and all along the coastal plain of the Mediterranean Sea as far north as Lebanon; these were the kings of the Hittites, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites.


After Joshua's death the people of Israel asked the Lord, "Which of our tribes should be the first to go and attack the Canaanites?"


After Abimelech's death Tola, the son of Puah and grandson of Dodo, came to free Israel.


Jephthah, a brave soldier from Gilead, was the son of a prostitute.


The men of Ephraim prepared for battle; they crossed the Jordan River to Zaphon and said to Jephthah, "Why did you cross the border to fight the Ammonites without calling us to go with you?


The Israelites sinned against the Lord again, and he let the Philistines rule them for forty years.


One day Samson went down to Timnah, where he noticed a certain young Philistine woman.


Some time later Samson went to visit his wife during the wheat harvest and took her a young goat.


One day Samson went to the Philistine city of Gaza, where he met a prostitute and went to bed with her.


There was once a man named Micah, who lived in the hill country of Ephraim.


There was no king in Israel at that time.


In those days before Israel had a king, there was a Levite living far back in the hill country of Ephraim.


The angel of the Lord went from Gilgal to Bochim and said to the Israelites, "I took you out of Egypt and brought you to the land that I promised to your ancestors.


All the people of Israel from Dan in the north to Beersheba in the south, as well as from the land of Gilead in the east, answered the call.


When the Israelites had gathered at Mizpah, they had made a solemn promise to the Lord: "None of us will allow a Benjaminite to marry a daughter of ours."


So then, the Lord left some nations in the land to test the Israelites who had not been through the wars in Canaan.


After Ehud died, the people of Israel sinned against the Lord again.


On that day Deborah and Barak son of Abinoam sang this song:




Praise the Lord!


Once again the people of Israel sinned against the Lord, so he let the people of Midian rule them for seven years.


One day Gideon and all his men got up early and camped beside Harod Spring.


Then the people of Ephraim said to Gideon, "Why didn't you call us when you went to fight the Midianites?


Gideon's son Abimelech went to the town of Shechem, where all his mother's relatives lived, and told them




to ask the men of Shechem, "Which would you prefer?


How lonely lies Jerusalem, once so full of people!


The Lord in his anger has covered Zion with darkness.


I am one who knows what it is to be punished by God.


Our glittering gold has grown dull; the stones of the Temple lie scattered in the streets.


Remember, O Lord, what has happened to us.


The Lord called to Moses from the Tent of the Lord's presence and gave him the following rules




for the Israelites to observe when they offer their sacrifices.


Aaron's sons, Nadab and Abihu, each took his fire pan, put live coals in it, added incense, and presented it to the Lord.


The Lord gave Moses and Aaron the following regulations




for the people of Israel.


The Lord gave Moses the following regulations




for the people of Israel.


The Lord gave Moses and Aaron these regulations.


The Lord gave Moses




the following regulations about the ritual purification of those of you cured of a dreaded skin disease.


The Lord gave Moses and Aaron the following regulations




for the people of Israel.


The Lord spoke to Moses after the death of the two sons of Aaron who were killed when they offered unholy fire to the Lord.


The Lord commanded Moses




to give Aaron and his sons and all the people of Israel the following regulations.


The Lord told Moses




to say to the people of Israel, "I am the Lord your God.


The Lord told Moses




to say to the community of Israel, "Be holy, because I, the Lord your God, am holy.


When any of you present an offering of grain to the Lord, you must first grind it into flour.


The Lord told Moses




to say to the people of Israel, "Any of you or any foreigner living among you who gives any children to be used in the worship of the god Molech shall be stoned to death by the whole community.


The Lord commanded Moses to tell the Aaronite priests, "No priest is to make himself ritually unclean by taking part in the funeral ceremonies when a relative dies,




unless it is his mother, father, son, daughter, brother,




or unmarried sister living in his house.


The Lord commanded Moses




to tell Aaron and his sons, "You must not bring disgrace on my holy name, so treat with respect the sacred offerings that the people of Israel dedicate to me.


The Lord gave Moses




the following regulations for the religious festivals, when the people of Israel are to gather for worship.


The Lord told Moses




to give the following orders to the people of Israel: Bring pure olive oil of the finest quality for the lamps in the Tent, so that a light might be kept burning regularly.


The Lord spoke to Moses on Mount Sinai and commanded him 1



to give the following regulations to the people of Israel.


The Lord said, "Do not make idols or set up statues, stone pillars, or carved stones to worship.


The Lord gave Moses




the following regulations for the people of Israel.


When any of you offer one of your cattle as a fellowship offering, it is to be a bull or a cow without any defects.


The Lord commanded Moses




to tell the people of Israel that anyone who sinned and broke any of the Lord's commands without intending to, would have to observe the following rules.


Sin offerings are required in the following cases.


The Lord gave the following regulations to Moses.


The following are the regulations for repayment offerings, which are very holy.


The Lord said to Moses,




"Take Aaron and his sons to the entrance of the Tent of my presence and bring the priestly garments, the anointing oil, the young bull for the sin offering, the two rams, and the basket of unleavened bread.


The day after the ordination rites were completed, Moses called Aaron and his sons and the leaders of Israel.


This is the message that the Lord gave Malachi to tell the people of Israel.


The Lord Almighty says to the priests, "This command is for you:




You must honor me by what you do.


The Lord Almighty answers, "I will send my messenger to prepare the way for me.


The Lord Almighty says, "The day is coming when all proud and evil people will burn like straw.


During the time that Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah were kings of Judah, the Lord gave this message to Micah, who was from the town of Moresheth.


How terrible it will be for those who lie awake and plan evil!


Listen, you rulers of Israel!


In days to come  the mountain where the Temple stands will be the highest one of all, towering above all the hills.


People of Jerusalem, gather your forces!


Listen to the Lord's case against Israel.


It's hopeless!


This is a message about Nineveh, the account of a vision seen by Nahum, who was from Elkosh.


Nineveh, you are under attack!


Doomed is the lying, murderous city, full of wealth to be looted and plundered!


This is the account of what Nehemiah son of Hacaliah accomplished.


The first to sign was the governor, Nehemiah son of Hacaliah, and then Zedekiah signed.


The leaders settled in Jerusalem, and the rest of the people drew lots to choose one family out of every ten to go and live in the holy city of Jerusalem, while the rest were to live in the other cities and towns.


The following is a list of the priests and Levites who returned from exile with Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and with the High Priest Joshua:




[Priests:] 12:Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra, Amariah, Malluch, Hattush, Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth, Iddo, Ginnethoi, Abijah, Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah, Shemaiah, Joiarib, Jedaiah, Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, and Jedaiah.


When the Law of Moses was being read aloud to the people, they came to the passage that said that no Ammonite or Moabite was ever to be permitted to join God's people.


One day four months later, when Emperor Artaxerxes was dining, I took the wine to him.


This is how the city wall was rebuilt.


When Sanballat heard that we Jews had begun rebuilding the wall, he became furious and began to ridicule us.


Some time later many of the people, both men and women, began to complain against the other Jews.


Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem, and the rest of our enemies heard that we had finished building the wall and that there were no gaps left in it, although we still had not set up the gates in the gateways.


And now the wall had been rebuilt, the gates had all been put in place, and the Temple guards, the members of the sacred choir, and the other Levites had been assigned their work.


By the seventh month the people of Israel were all settled in their towns.


On the twenty-fourth day of the same month the people of Israel gathered to fast in order to show sorrow for their sins.


On the first day of the second month in the second year after the people of Israel left Egypt, the Lord spoke to Moses there in the Tent of his presence in the Sinai Desert.


The Lord said to Moses,




"Make two trumpets of hammered silver to use for calling the people together and for breaking camp.


The people began to complain to the Lord about their troubles.


Moses had married a Cushite  woman, and Miriam and Aaron criticized him for it.


The Lord said to Moses,




"Choose one of the leaders from each of the twelve tribes and send them as spies to explore the land of Canaan, which I am giving to the Israelites."


All night long the people cried out in distress.


The Lord gave Moses




the following regulations for the people of Israel to observe in the land that he was going to give them.


Korah son of Izhar, from the Levite clan of Kohath, rebelled against the leadership of Moses.


The Lord said to Moses,




"Tell the people of Israel to give you twelve walking sticks, one from the leader of each tribe.


The Lord said to Aaron, "You, your sons, and the Levites must suffer the consequences of any guilt connected with serving in the Tent of my presence; but only you and your sons will suffer the consequences of service in the priesthood.


The Lord commanded Moses and Aaron




to give the Israelites the following regulations.


The Lord gave Moses and Aaron the following instructions.


In the first month the whole community of Israel came to the wilderness of Zin and camped at Kadesh.


When the Canaanite king of Arad in the southern part of Canaan heard that the Israelites were coming by way of Atharim, he attacked them and captured some of them.


The Israelites moved on and set up camp in the plains of Moab east of the Jordan and opposite Jericho.


He said to Balak, "Build seven altars here for me, and bring me seven bulls and seven rams."


By now Balaam knew that the Lord wanted him to bless the people of Israel, so he did not go to look for omens, as he had done before.


When the Israelites were camped at Acacia Valley, the men began to have sexual intercourse with the Moabite women who were there.


After the epidemic the Lord said to Moses and Eleazar son of Aaron, 1



"Take a census by families of the whole community of Israel, of all men twenty years old or older who are fit for military service."


Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah were the daughters of Zelophehad son of Hepher, son of Gilead, son of Machir, son of Manasseh, son of Joseph.


The Lord commanded Moses




to instruct the Israelites to present to God at the appointed times the required food offerings that are pleasing to him.


On the first day of the seventh month you are to gather for worship, and no work is to be done.


This is the family of Aaron and Moses at the time the Lord spoke to Moses on Mount Sinai.


Moses gave the following instructions to the leaders of the tribes of Israel.


The Lord said to Moses,




"Punish the Midianites for what they did to the people of Israel.


The tribes of Reuben and Gad had a lot of livestock.


The following account gives the names of the places where the Israelites set up camp after they left Egypt in their tribes under the leadership of Moses and Aaron.


The Lord gave Moses




the following instructions for the people of Israel: "When you enter Canaan, the land which I am giving you, the borders of your territory will be as follows.


In the plains of Moab across the Jordan from Jericho the Lord said to Moses, 1



"Tell the Israelites that from the property they receive they must give the Levites some cities to live in and pasture land around the cities.


The heads of the families in the clan of Gilead, the son of Machir and grandson of Manasseh son of Joseph, went to Moses and the other leaders.


The Lord told Moses




to take a census of the Levite clan of Kohath by subclans and families,




and to register all the men between the ages of thirty and fifty who were qualified to work in the Tent of the Lord's presence.


The Lord said to Moses,




"Command the people of Israel to expel from the camp everyone with a dreaded skin disease or a bodily discharge and everyone who is unclean by contact with a corpse.


The Lord commanded Moses




to give the following instructions to the people of Israel.


On the day Moses finished setting up the Tent of the Lord's presence, he anointed and dedicated the Tent and all its equipment, and the altar and all its equipment.


The Lord said to Moses, 1



"Tell Aaron that when he puts the seven lamps on the lampstand, he should place them so that the light shines toward the front."


The Lord spoke to Moses in the Sinai Desert in the first month of the second year after the people of Israel had left Egypt.


This is the prophecy of Obadiah - what the Sovereign Lord said about the nation of Edom.


The proverbs of Solomon, son of David and king of Israel.


These are Solomon's proverbs: Wise children make their fathers proud of them; foolish ones bring their mothers grief.


The Lord hates people who use dishonest scales.


Any who love knowledge want to be told when they are wrong.


Wise children pay attention when their parents correct them, but arrogant people never admit they are wrong.


Homes are made by the wisdom of women, but are destroyed by foolishness.


A gentle answer quiets anger, but a harsh one stirs it up.


We may make our plans, but God has the last word.


Better to eat a dry crust of bread with peace of mind than have a banquet in a house full of trouble.


People who do not get along with others are interested only in themselves; they will disagree with what everyone else knows is right.


It is better to be poor but honest than to be a lying fool.


My child, learn what I teach you and never forget what I tell you to do.


Drinking too much makes you loud and foolish.


The Lord controls the mind of a king as easily as he directs the course of a stream.


If you have to choose between a good reputation and great wealth, choose a good reputation.


When you sit down to eat with someone important, keep in mind who he is.


Don't be envious of evil people, and don't try to make friends with them.


Here are more of Solomon's proverbs, copied by scribes at the court of King Hezekiah of Judah.


Praise for a fool is out of place, like snow in summer or rain at harvest time.


Never boast about tomorrow.


The wicked run when no one is chasing them, but an honest person is as brave as a lion.


If you get more stubborn every time you are corrected, one day you will be crushed and never recover.


My child, don't forget what I teach you.


These are the solemn words of Agur son of Jakeh: "God is not with me, God is not with me, and I am helpless.


These are the solemn words which King Lemuel's mother said to him:




"You are my own dear son, the answer to my prayers.


My children, listen to what your father teaches you.


My child, pay attention and listen to my wisdom and insight.


My child, have you promised to be responsible for someone else's debts?


My child, remember what I say and never forget what I tell you to do.


Listen!


Wisdom has built her house and made seven columns for it.


Happy are those who reject the advice of evil people, who do not follow the example of sinners or join those who have no use for God.


Why are you so far away, O Lord?


Sing to the Lord, all the world!


My song is about loyalty and justice, and I sing it to you, O Lord.


Listen to my prayer, O Lord, and hear my cry for help!


Praise the Lord, my soul!


Praise the Lord, my soul!


Give thanks to the Lord, proclaim his greatness; tell the nations what he has done.


Praise the Lord!


"Give thanks to the Lord, because he is good; 1 his love is eternal!"


I have complete confidence, O God!


I praise you, God; don't remain silent!


I trust in the Lord for safety.


The Lord said to my lord, 1 "Sit here at my right side until I put your enemies under your feet."


Praise the Lord!


Praise the Lord!


Praise the Lord!


When the people of Israel left Egypt, 1 when Jacob's descendants left that foreign land,




Judah became the Lord's holy people, Israel became his own possession.


To you alone, O Lord, to you alone, and not to us, must glory be given because of your constant love and faithfulness.


I love the Lord, because he hears me; he listens to my prayers.


Praise the Lord, all nations!


Give thanks to the Lord, because he is good, 1 and his love is eternal.


Happy are those whose lives are faultless, who live according to the law of the Lord.


Help us, Lord!


When I was in trouble, I called to the Lord, and he answered me.


I look to the mountains; where will my help come from?


I was glad when they said to me, "Let us go to the Lord's house."


Lord, I look up to you, up to heaven, where you rule.


What if the Lord had not been on our side?


Those who trust in the Lord are like Mount Zion, which can never be shaken, never be moved.


When the Lord brought us back to Jerusalem,  it was like a dream!


If the Lord does not build the house, the work of the builders is useless; if the Lord does not protect the city, it does no good for the sentries to stand guard.


Happy are those who obey the Lord, who live by his commands.


Israel, tell us how your enemies have persecuted you ever since you were young.


How much longer will you forget me, Lord?


From the depths of my despair I call to you, Lord.


Lord, I have given up my pride and turned away from my arrogance.


Lord, do not forget David and all the hardships he endured.


How wonderful it is, how pleasant, for God's people to live together in harmony!


Come, praise the Lord, all his servants, all who serve in his Temple at night.


Praise the Lord!


Give thanks to the Lord, because he is good; 1 his love is eternal.


By the rivers of Babylon we sat down; there we wept when we remembered Zion.


I thank you, Lord, with all my heart; I sing praise to you before the gods.


Lord, you have examined me and you know me.


Fools say to themselves, 1 "There is no God!"


Save me, Lord, from evildoers; keep me safe from violent people.


I call to you, Lord; help me now!


I call to the Lord for help; I plead with him.


Lord, hear my prayer!


Praise the Lord, my protector!


I will proclaim your greatness, my God and king; I will thank you forever and ever.


Praise the Lord!


Praise the Lord!


Praise the Lord!


Praise the Lord!


Lord, who may enter your Temple?


Praise the Lord!


Protect me, O God; I trust in you for safety.


Listen, O Lord, to my plea for justice; pay attention to my cry for help!


How I love you, Lord!


How clearly the sky reveals God's glory!


Why do the nations plan rebellion?


May the Lord answer you when you are in trouble!


The king is glad, O Lord, because you gave him strength; he rejoices because you made him victorious.


My God, my God, why have you abandoned me?


The Lord is my shepherd; I have everything I need.


The world and all that is in it belong to the Lord; 1 the earth and all who live on it are his.


To you, O Lord, I offer my prayer;




in you, my God, I trust.


Declare me innocent, O Lord, because I do what is right and trust you completely.


The Lord is my light and my salvation; I will fear no one.


O Lord, my defender, I call to you.


Praise the Lord, you heavenly beings; 1 praise his glory and power.


I have so many enemies, Lord, so many who turn against me!


I praise you, Lord, because you have saved me and kept my enemies from gloating over me.


I come to you, Lord, for protection; never let me be defeated.


Happy are those whose sins are forgiven, 1 whose wrongs are pardoned.


All you that are righteous, shout for joy for what the Lord has done; praise him, all you that obey him.


I will always thank the Lord; I will never stop praising him.


Oppose those who oppose me, Lord, and fight those who fight against me!


Sin speaks to the wicked deep in their hearts; 1 they reject God and do not have reverence for him.


Don't be worried on account of the wicked; don't be jealous of those who do wrong.


O Lord, don't punish me in your anger!


I said, "I will be careful about what I do and will not let my tongue make me sin; I will not say anything while evil people are near."


Answer me when I pray, O God, my defender!


I waited patiently for the Lord's help; then he listened to me and heard my cry.


Happy are those who are concerned for the poor; the Lord will help them when they are in trouble.


As a deer longs for a stream of cool water, so I long for you, O God.


O God, declare me innocent, and defend my cause against the ungodly; deliver me from lying and evil people!


With our own ears we have heard it, O God -  our ancestors have told us about it, about the great things you did in their time, in the days of long ago:




how you yourself drove out the heathen and established your people in their land; how you punished the other nations and caused your own to prosper.


Beautiful words fill my mind, as I compose this song for the king.


God is our shelter and strength, always ready to help in times of trouble.


Clap your hands for joy, all peoples!


The Lord is great and is to be highly praised in the city of our God, on his sacred hill.


Hear this, everyone!


Listen to my words, O Lord, and hear my sighs.


The Almighty God, the Lord, speaks; he calls to the whole earth from east to west.


Be merciful to me, O God, because of your constant love.


Why do you boast, great one, of your evil?


Fools say to themselves, 1 "There is no God."


Save me by your power, O God; set me free by your might!


Hear my prayer, O God; don't turn away from my plea!


Be merciful to me, O God, because I am under attack; my enemies persecute me all the time.


Be merciful to me, O God, be merciful, because I come to you for safety.


Do you rulers  ever give a just decision?


Save me from my enemies, my God; protect me from those who attack me!


Lord, don't be angry and rebuke me!


You have rejected us, God, and defeated us; you have been angry with us - but now turn back to us.


Hear my cry, O God; listen to my prayer!


I wait patiently for God to save me; I depend on him alone.


O God, you are my God, and I long for you.


I am in trouble, God - listen to my prayer!


O God, it is right for us to praise you in Zion and keep our promises to you,




because you answer prayers.


Praise God with shouts of joy, all people!


God, be merciful to us and bless us; look on us with kindness,




so that the whole world may know your will; so that all nations may know your salvation.


God rises up and scatters his enemies.


Save me, O God!


O Lord, my God, I come to you for protection; rescue me and save me from all who pursue me,




or else like a lion they will carry me off where no one can save me, and there they will tear me to pieces.


Save me, O God!


Lord, I have come to you for protection; never let me be defeated!


Teach the king to judge with your righteousness, O God; share with him your own justice,




so that he will rule over your people with justice and govern the oppressed with righteousness.


God is indeed good to Israel, to those who have pure hearts.


Why have you abandoned us like this, O God?


We give thanks to you, O God, we give thanks to you!


God is known in Judah; his name is honored in Israel.


I cry aloud to God; I cry aloud, and he hears me.


Listen, my people, to my teaching, and pay attention to what I say.


O God, the heathen have invaded your land.


O Lord, our Lord, your greatness is seen in all the world!


Listen to us, O Shepherd of Israel; 1 hear us, leader of your flock.


Shout for joy to God our defender; sing praise to the God of Jacob!


God presides in the heavenly council; in the assembly of the gods he gives his decision:




"You must stop judging unjustly; you must no longer be partial to the wicked!


O God, do not keep silent; do not be still, do not be quiet!


How I love your Temple, Lord Almighty!


Lord, you have been merciful to your land; you have made Israel prosperous again.


Listen to me, Lord, and answer me, for I am helpless and weak.


The Lord built his city on the sacred hill;




more than any other place in Israel he loves the city of Jerusalem.


Lord God, my savior, I cry out all day, and at night I come before you.


O Lord, I will always sing of your constant love; I will proclaim your faithfulness forever.


I will praise you, Lord, with all my heart; I will tell of all the wonderful things you have done.


O Lord, you have always been our home.


Whoever goes to the Lord for safety, whoever remains under the protection of the Almighty,




can say to him, "You are my defender and protector.


How good it is to give thanks to you, O Lord, to sing in your honor, O Most High God,




to proclaim your constant love every morning and your faithfulness every night,




with the music of stringed instruments and with melody on the harp.


The Lord is king.


Lord, you are a God who punishes; reveal your anger!


Come, let us praise the Lord!


Sing a new song to the Lord!


The Lord is king!


Sing a new song to the Lord; he has done wonderful things!


The Lord is king, 1 and the people tremble.


Long ago, in the days before Israel had a king, there was a famine in the land.


Naomi had a relative named Boaz, a rich and influential man who belonged to the family of her husband Elimelech.


Some time later Naomi said to Ruth, "I must find a husband for you, so that you will have a home of your own.


Boaz went to the meeting place at the town gate and sat down there.


The most beautiful of songs, by Solomon.


I am only a wild flower in Sharon, a lily in a mountain valley.


Asleep on my bed, night after night I dreamed of the one I love; I was looking for him, but couldn't find him.


How beautiful you are, my love!


I have entered my garden, my sweetheart, my bride.


Most beautiful of women, where has your lover gone?


What a magnificent young woman you are!


I wish that you were my brother, that my mother had nursed you at her breast.


In the eighth month of the second year that Darius was emperor of Persia, the Lord gave this message to the prophet Zechariah, the son of Berechiah and grandson of Iddo.


Ask the Lord for rain in the spring of the year.


Open your doors, Lebanon, so that fire can burn down your cedar trees!


This is a message about Israel from the Lord, the Lord who spread out the skies, created the earth, and gave life to man.


"When that time comes," says the Lord Almighty, "a fountain will be opened to purify the descendants of David and the people of Jerusalem from their sin and idolatry.


The day when the Lord will sit in judgment is near.


In another vision I saw a man with a measuring line in his hand.


In another vision the Lord showed me the High Priest Joshua standing before the angel of the Lord.


The angel who had been speaking to me came again and roused me as if I had been sleeping.


I looked again, and this time I saw a scroll flying through the air.


I had another vision.


In the fourth year that Darius was emperor, on the fourth day of the ninth month (the month of Kislev), the Lord gave me a message.


The Lord Almighty gave this message to Zechariah:




"I have longed to help Jerusalem because of my deep love for her people, a love which has made me angry with her enemies.


This is the Lord's message: 1 He has decreed punishment for the land of Hadrach and for the city of Damascus.


This is the message that the Lord gave to Zephaniah during the time that Josiah son of Amon was king of Judah.


Shameless nation, come to your senses




before you are driven away like chaff blown by the wind, before the burning anger of the Lord comes upon you, before the day when he shows his fury.


Jerusalem is doomed, that corrupt, rebellious city that oppresses its own people.


From Paul, who was called by the will of God to be an apostle of Christ Jesus, and from our brother Sosthenes -




To the church of God which is in Corinth, to all who are called to be God's holy people, who belong to him in union with Christ Jesus, together with all people everywhere who worship our Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours: 1



May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace.


I want you to remember, my friends, what happened to our ancestors who followed Moses.


Imitate me, then, just as I imitate Christ.


Now, concerning what you wrote about the gifts from the Holy Spirit.


I may be able to speak the languages of human beings and even of angels, but if I have no love, my speech is no more than a noisy gong or a clanging bell.


It is love, then, that you should strive for.


And now I want to remind you, my friends, of the Good News which I preached to you, which you received, and on which your faith stands firm.


Now, concerning what you wrote about the money to be raised to help God's people in Judea.


When I came to you, my friends, to preach God's secret truth,  I did not use big words and great learning.


As a matter of fact, my friends, I could not talk to you as I talk to people who have the Spirit; I had to talk to you as though you belonged to this world, as children in the Christian faith.


You should think of us as Christ's servants, who have been put in charge of God's secret truths.


Now, it is actually being said that there is sexual immorality among you so terrible that not even the heathen would be guilty of it.


If any of you have a dispute with another Christian, how dare you go before heathen judges instead of letting God's people settle the matter?


Now, to deal with the matters you wrote about.


Now, concerning what you wrote about food offered to idols.


Am I not a free man?


We write to you about the Word of life, which has existed from the very beginning.


I am writing this to you, my children, so that you will not sin; but if anyone does sin, we have someone who pleads with the Father on our behalf - Jesus Christ, the righteous one.


See how much the Father has loved us!


My dear friends, do not believe all who claim to have the Spirit, but test them to find out if the spirit they have comes from God.


Whoever believes that Jesus is the Messiah is a child of God; and whoever loves a father loves his child also.


From Peter, apostle of Jesus Christ -  To God's chosen people who live as refugees scattered throughout the provinces of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia.


Rid yourselves, then, of all evil; no more lying or hypocrisy or jealousy or insulting language.


In the same way you wives must submit yourselves to your husbands, so that if any of them do not believe God's word, your conduct will win them over to believe.


Since Christ suffered physically, you too must strengthen yourselves with the same way of thinking that he had; because whoever suffers physically is no longer involved with sin.


I, who am an elder myself, appeal to the church elders among you.


From Paul, Silas, and Timothy -  1 To the people of the church in Thessalonica, who belong to God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: May grace and peace be yours.


Our friends, you yourselves know that our visit to you was not a failure.


Finally, we could not bear it any longer.


Finally, our friends, you learned from us how you should live in order to please God.


There is no need to write you, friends, about the times and occasions when these things will happen.


From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by order of God our Savior and Christ Jesus our hope -




To Timothy, my true son in the faith: 1 May God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord give you grace, mercy, and peace.


First of all, then, I urge that petitions, prayers, requests, and thanksgivings be offered to God for all people;




for kings and all others who are in authority, that we may live a quiet and peaceful life with all reverence toward God and with proper conduct.


This is a true saying: If a man is eager to be a church leader, he desires an excellent work.


The Spirit says clearly that some people will abandon the faith in later times; they will obey lying spirits and follow the teachings of demons.


Do not rebuke an older man, but appeal to him as if he were your father.


Those who are slaves must consider their masters worthy of all respect, so that no one will speak evil of the name of God and of our teaching.


From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by God's will, and from our brother Timothy -  1 To the church of God in Corinth, and to all God's people throughout Achaia:




May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace.


I, Paul, make a personal appeal to you - I who am said to be meek and mild when I am with you, but harsh with you when I am away.


I wish you would tolerate me, even when I am a bit foolish.


I have to boast, even though it doesn't do any good.


This is now the third time that I am coming to visit you.


So I made up my mind not to come to you again to make you sad.


Does this sound as if we were again boasting about ourselves?


God in his mercy has given us this work to do, and so we do not become discouraged.


For we know that when this tent we live in - our body here on earth - is torn down, God will have a house in heaven for us to live in, a home he himself has made, which will last forever.


In our work together with God, then, we beg you who have received God's grace not to let it be wasted.


All these promises are made to us, my dear friends.


Our friends, we want you to know what God's grace has accomplished in the churches in Macedonia.


There is really no need for me to write you about the help being sent to God's people in Judea.


From the Elder -  To the dear Lady and to her children, a whom I truly love.


From Simon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ -  To those who through the righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ have been given a faith as precious as ours:




May grace and peace be yours in full measure through your knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord.


False prophets appeared in the past among the people, and in the same way false teachers will appear among you.


My dear friends, this is now the second letter I have written you.


From Paul, Silas, and Timothy -  1 To the people of the church in Thessalonica, who belong to God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:




May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace.


Concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered together to be with him: I beg you, my friends, 1



not to be so easily confused in your thinking or upset by the claim that the Day of the Lord has come.


Finally, our friends, pray for us that the Lord's message may continue to spread rapidly and be received with honor, just as it was among you.


From Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by God's will, sent to proclaim the promised life which we have in union with Christ Jesus -




To Timothy, my dear son: 1 May God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord give you grace, mercy, and peace.


As for you, my son, be strong through the grace that is ours in union with Christ Jesus.


Remember that there will be difficult times in the last days.


In the presence of God and of Christ Jesus, who will judge the living and the dead, and because he is coming to rule as King, I solemnly urge you




to preach the message, to insist upon proclaiming it (whether the time is right or not), to convince, reproach, and encourage, as you teach with all patience.


From the Elder -  1 To my dear Gaius, whom I truly love.


Dear Theophilus: 1 In my first book I wrote about all the things that Jesus did and taught from the time he began his work




until the day he was taken up to heaven.


There was a man in Caesarea named Cornelius, who was a captain in the Roman army regiment called "The Italian Regiment."


The apostles and the other believers throughout Judea heard that the Gentiles also had received the word of God.


About this time King Herod  began to persecute some members of the church.


In the church at Antioch there were some prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon (called the Black), Lucius (from Cyrene), Manaen (who had been brought up with Governor Herod ), and Saul.


The same thing happened in Iconium: Paul and Barnabas went to the synagogue and spoke in such a way that a great number of Jews and Gentiles became believers.


Some men came from Judea to Antioch and started teaching the believers, "You cannot be saved unless you are circumcised as the Law of Moses requires."


Paul traveled on to Derbe and Lystra, where a Christian named Timothy lived.


Paul and Silas traveled on through Amphipolis and Apollonia and came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue.


After this, Paul left Athens and went on to Corinth.


While Apollos was in Corinth, Paul traveled through the interior of the province and arrived in Ephesus.


When the day of Pentecost came, all the believers were gathered together in one place.


After the uproar died down, Paul called together the believers and with words of encouragement said good-bye to them.


We said good-bye to them and left.


"My fellow Jews, listen to me as I make my defense before you!"


Paul looked straight at the Council and said, "My fellow Israelites!


Five days later the High Priest Ananias went to Caesarea with some elders and a lawyer named Tertullus.


Three days after Festus arrived in the province, he went from Caesarea to Jerusalem,




where the chief priests and the Jewish leaders brought their charges against Paul.


Agrippa said to Paul, "You have permission to speak on your own behalf."


When it was decided that we should sail to Italy, they handed Paul and some other prisoners over to Julius, an officer in the Roman army regiment called "The Emperor's Regiment."


When we were safely ashore, we learned that the island was called Malta.


One day Peter and John went to the Temple at three o'clock in the afternoon, the hour for prayer.


Peter and John were still speaking to the people when some priests,  the officer in charge of the Temple guards, and some Sadducees arrived.


But there was a man named Ananias, who with his wife Sapphira sold some property that belonged to them.


Some time later, as the number of disciples kept growing, there was a quarrel between the Greek-speaking Jews and the native Jews.


The High Priest asked Stephen, "Is this true?"


And Saul approved of his murder.


In the meantime Saul kept up his violent threats of murder against the followers of the Lord.


From Paul, who by God's will is an apostle of Christ Jesus, and from our brother Timothy -




To God's people in Colossae, who are our faithful friends in union with Christ: May God our Father give you grace and peace.


Let me tell you how hard I have worked for you and for the people in Laodicea and for all others who do not know me personally.


You have been raised to life with Christ, so set your hearts on the things that are in heaven, where Christ sits on his throne at the right side of God.


Masters, be fair and just in the way you treat your slaves.


From Paul, who by God's will is an apostle of Christ Jesus -  1 To God's people in Ephesus, a who are faithful in their life in union with Christ Jesus:




May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace.


In the past you were spiritually dead because of your disobedience and sins.


For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for the sake of you Gentiles, pray to God.


I urge you, then - I who am a prisoner because I serve the Lord: live a life that measures up to the standard God set when he called you.


Since you are God's dear children, you must try to be like him.


Children, it is your Christian duty to  obey your parents, for this is the right thing to do.


From Paul, whose call to be an apostle did not come from human beings or by human means, but from Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him from death.


Fourteen years later I went back to Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking Titus along with me.


You foolish Galatians!


But now to continue - the son who will receive his father's property is treated just like a slave while he is young, even though he really owns everything.


Freedom is what we have - Christ has set us free!


My friends, if someone is caught in any kind of wrongdoing, those of you who are spiritual should set him right; but you must do it in a gentle way.


In the past God spoke to our ancestors many times and in many ways through the prophets,




but in these last days he has spoken to us through his Son.


The Jewish Law is not a full and faithful model of the real things; it is only a faint outline of the good things to come.


To have faith is to be sure of the things we hope for, to be certain of the things we cannot see.


As for us, we have this large crowd of witnesses around us.


Keep on loving one another as Christians.


That is why we must hold on all the more firmly to the truths we have heard, so that we will not be carried away.


My Christian friends, who also have been called by God!


Now, God has offered us the promise that we may receive that rest he spoke about.


Every high priest is chosen from his fellow-men and appointed to serve God on their behalf, to offer sacrifices and offerings for sins.


Let us go forward, then, to mature teaching and leave behind us the first lessons of the Christian message.


This Melchizedek was king of Salem and a priest of the Most High God.


The whole point of what we are saying is that we have such a High Priest, who sits at the right of the throne of the Divine Majesty in heaven.


The first covenant had rules for worship and a place made for worship as well.


From James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ: 1 Greetings to all God's people scattered over the whole world.


My friends, as believers in our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, you must never treat people in different ways according to their outward appearance.


My friends, not many of you should become teachers.


Where do all the fights and quarrels among you come from?


And now, you rich people, listen to me!


In the beginning the Word already existed; the Word was with God, and the Word was God.


Jesus said, "I am telling you the truth: the man who does not enter the sheep pen by the gate, but climbs in some other way, is a thief and a robber.


A man named Lazarus, who lived in Bethany, became sick.


Six days before the Passover, Jesus went to Bethany, the home of Lazarus, the man he had raised from death.


It was now the day before the Passover Festival.


"Do not be worried and upset," Jesus told them.


"I am the real vine, and my Father is the gardener.


"I have told you this, so that you will not give up your faith.


After Jesus finished saying this, he looked up to heaven and said, "Father, the hour has come.


After Jesus had said this prayer, he left with his disciples and went across Kidron Brook.


Then Pilate took Jesus and had him whipped.


Two days later there was a wedding in the town of Cana in Galilee.


Early on Sunday morning, while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene went to the tomb and saw that the stone had been taken away from the entrance.


After this, Jesus appeared once more to his disciples at Lake Tiberias.


There was a Jewish leader named Nicodemus, who belonged to the party of the Pharisees.


(The Pharisees heard that Jesus was winning and baptizing more disciples than John




Actually, Jesus himself did not baptize anyone; only his disciples did.)


After this, Jesus went to Jerusalem for a religious festival.


After this, Jesus went across Lake Galilee (or, Lake Tiberias, as it is also called).


After this, Jesus traveled in Galilee; he did not want to travel in Judea, because the Jewish authorities there were wanting to kill him.


[Then everyone went home, but Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.


As Jesus was walking along, he saw a man who had been born blind.


From Jude, servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James -  1 To those who have been called by God, who live in the love of God the Father and the protection of Jesus Christ:




May mercy, peace, and love be yours in full measure.


Dear Theophilus: Many people have done their best to write a report of the things that have taken place among us.


After this the Lord chose another seventy-two  men and sent them out two by two, to go ahead of him to every town and place where he himself was about to go.


One day Jesus was praying in a certain place.


As thousands of people crowded together, so that they were stepping on each other, Jesus said first to his disciples, "Be on guard against the yeast of the Pharisees - I mean their hypocrisy.


At that time some people were there who told Jesus about the Galileans whom Pilate had killed while they were offering sacrifices to God.


One Sabbath Jesus went to eat a meal at the home of one of the leading Pharisees; and people were watching Jesus closely.


One day when many tax collectors and other outcasts came to listen to Jesus, 1



the Pharisees and the teachers of the Law started grumbling, "This man welcomes outcasts and even eats with them!"


Jesus said to his disciples, "There was once a rich man who had a servant who managed his property.


Jesus said to his disciples, "Things that make people fall into sin are bound to happen, but how terrible for the one who makes them happen!


Then Jesus told his disciples a parable to teach them that they should always pray and never become discouraged.


Jesus went on into Jericho and was passing through.


At that time Emperor Augustus ordered a census to be taken throughout the Roman Empire.


One day when Jesus was in the Temple teaching the people and preaching the Good News, the chief priests and the teachers of the Law, together with the elders, came




and said to him, "Tell us, what right do you have to do these things?


Jesus looked around and saw rich people dropping their gifts in the Temple treasury,




and he also saw a very poor widow dropping in two little copper coins.


The time was near for the Festival of Unleavened Bread, which is called the Passover.


The whole group rose up and took Jesus before Pilate,




where they began to accuse him: "We caught this man misleading our people, telling them not to pay taxes to the Emperor and claiming that he himself is the Messiah, a king."


Very early on Sunday morning the women went to the tomb, carrying the spices they had prepared.


It was the fifteenth year of the rule of Emperor Tiberius; Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, Herod was ruler of Galilee, and his brother Philip was ruler of the territory of Iturea and Trachonitis; Lysanias was ruler of Abilene,




and Annas and Caiaphas were High Priests.


Jesus returned from the Jordan full of the Holy Spirit and was led by the Spirit into the desert,




where he was tempted by the Devil for forty days.


One day Jesus was standing on the shore of Lake Gennesaret while the people pushed their way up to him to listen to the word of God.


Jesus was walking through some wheat fields on a Sabbath.


When Jesus had finished saying all these things to the people, he went to Capernaum.


Some time later Jesus traveled through towns and villages, preaching the Good News about the Kingdom of God.


Jesus called the twelve disciples together and gave them power and authority to drive out all demons and to cure diseases.


This is the Good News about Jesus Christ, the Son of God.


Then Jesus left that place, went to the province of Judea, and crossed the Jordan River.


As they approached Jerusalem, near the towns of Bethphage and Bethany, they came to the Mount of Olives.


Then Jesus spoke to them in parables: "Once there was a man who planted a vineyard, put a fence around it, dug a hole for the wine press, and built a watchtower.


As Jesus was leaving the Temple, one of his disciples said, "Look, Teacher!


It was now two days before the Festival of Passover and Unleavened Bread.


Early in the morning the chief priests met hurriedly with the elders, the teachers of the Law, and the whole Council, and made their plans.


After the Sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought spices to go and anoint the body of Jesus.


A few days later Jesus went back to Capernaum, and the news spread that he was at home.


Then Jesus went back to the synagogue, where there was a man who had a paralyzed hand.


Again Jesus began to teach beside Lake Galilee.


Jesus and his disciples arrived on the other side of Lake Galilee, in the territory of Gerasa.


Jesus left that place and went back to his hometown, followed by his disciples.


Some Pharisees and teachers of the Law who had come from Jerusalem gathered around Jesus.


Not long afterward another large crowd came together.


And he went on to say, "I tell you, there are some here who will not die until they have seen the Kingdom of God come with power."


This is the list of the ancestors of Jesus Christ, a descendant of David, who was a descendant of Abraham.


Jesus called his twelve disciples together and gave them authority to drive out evil spirits and to heal every disease and every sickness.


When Jesus finished giving these instructions to his twelve disciples, he left that place and went off to teach and preach in the towns near there.


Not long afterward Jesus was walking through some wheat fields on a Sabbath.


That same day Jesus left the house and went to the lakeside, where he sat down to teach.


At that time Herod, the ruler of Galilee, heard about Jesus.


Then some Pharisees and teachers of the Law came from Jerusalem to Jesus and asked him,




"Why is it that your disciples disobey the teaching handed down by our ancestors?


Some Pharisees and Sadducees who came to Jesus wanted to trap him, so they asked him to perform a miracle for them, to show that God approved of him.


Six days later Jesus took with him Peter and the brothers James and John and led them up a high mountain where they were alone.


At that time the disciples came to Jesus, asking, "Who is the greatest in the Kingdom of heaven?"


When Jesus finished saying these things, he left Galilee and went to the territory of Judea on the other side of the Jordan River.


Jesus was born in the town of Bethlehem in Judea, during the time when Herod was king.


"The Kingdom of heaven is like this.


As Jesus and his disciples approached Jerusalem, they came to Bethphage at the Mount of Olives.


Jesus again used parables in talking to the people.


Then Jesus spoke to the crowds and to his disciples.


Jesus left and was going away from the Temple when his disciples came to him to call his attention to its buildings.


"At that time the Kingdom of heaven will be like this.


When Jesus had finished teaching all these things, he said to his disciples,




"In two days, as you know, it will be the Passover Festival, and the Son of Man will be handed over to be crucified."


Early in the morning all the chief priests and the elders made their plans against Jesus to put him to death.


After the Sabbath, as Sunday morning was dawning, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb.


At that time John the Baptist came to the desert of Judea and started preaching.


Then the Spirit led Jesus into the desert to be tempted by the Devil.


Jesus saw the crowds and went up a hill, where he sat down.


"Make certain you do not perform your religious duties in public so that people will see what you do.


"Do not judge others, so that God will not judge you,




for God will judge you in the same way you judge others, and he will apply to you the same rules you apply to others.


When Jesus came down from the hill, large crowds followed him.


Jesus got into the boat and went back across the lake to his own town,




where some people brought to him a paralyzed man, lying on a bed.


From Paul, a prisoner for the sake of Christ Jesus, and from our brother Timothy -  To our friend and fellow worker Philemon,




and the church that meets in your house, and our sister Apphia, and our fellow soldier Archippus: 1



May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace.


From Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus -  1 To all God's people in Philippi who are in union with Christ Jesus, including the church leaders and helpers:




May God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ give you grace and peace.


Your life in Christ makes you strong, and his love comforts you.


In conclusion, my friends, be joyful in your union with the Lord.


So then, my friends, how dear you are to me and how I miss you!


This book is the record of the events that Jesus Christ revealed.


Then I saw another mighty angel coming down out of heaven.


I was then given a stick that looked like a measuring-rod, and was told, "Go and measure the temple of God and the altar, and count those who are worshiping in the temple.


Then a great and mysterious sight appeared in the sky.


Then I saw a beast coming up out of the sea.


Then I looked, and there was the Lamb standing on Mount Zion; with him were 144,000 people who have his name and his Father's name written on their foreheads.


Then I saw in the sky another mysterious sight, great and amazing.


Then I heard a loud voice speaking from the temple to the seven angels: "Go and pour out the seven bowls of God's anger on the earth!"


Then one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came to me and said, "Come, and I will show you how the famous prostitute is to be punished, that great city that is built near many rivers.


After this I saw another angel coming down out of heaven.


After this I heard what sounded like the roar of a large crowd of people in heaven, saying, "Praise God!


"To the angel of the church in Ephesus write: "This is the message from the one who holds the seven stars in his right hand and who walks among the seven gold lampstands.


Then I saw an angel coming down from heaven, holding in his hand the key of the abyss and a heavy chain.


Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth.


The angel also showed me the river of the water of life, sparkling like crystal, and coming from the throne of God and of the Lamb 1



and flowing down the middle of the city's street.


"To the angel of the church in Sardis write: "This is the message from the one who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars.


At this point I had another vision and saw an open door in heaven.


I saw a scroll in the right hand of the one who sits on the throne; it was covered with writing on both sides and was sealed with seven seals.


Then I saw the Lamb break open the first of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures say in a voice that sounded like thunder, "Come!"


After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth, holding back the four winds so that no wind should blow on the earth or the sea or against any tree.


When the Lamb broke open the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.


Then the fifth angel blew his trumpet.


From Paul, a servant of Christ Jesus and an apostle chosen and called by God to preach his Good News.


My friends, how I wish with all my heart that my own people might be saved!


I ask, then: Did God reject his own people?


So then, my friends, because of God's great mercy to us I appeal to you: Offer yourselves as a living sacrifice to God, dedicated to his service and pleasing to him.


Everyone must obey state authorities, because no authority exists without God's permission, and the existing authorities have been put there by God.


Welcome those who are weak in faith, but do not argue with them about their personal opinions.


We who are strong in the faith ought to help the weak to carry their burdens.


I recommend to you our sister Phoebe, who serves the church at Cenchreae.


Do you, my friend, pass judgment on others?


Do the Jews then have any advantage over the Gentiles?


What shall we say, then, of Abraham, the father of our race?


Now that we have been put right with God through faith, we have  peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.


What shall we say, then?


Certainly you will understand what I am about to say, my friends, because all of you know about law.


There is no condemnation now for those who live in union with Christ Jesus.


I am speaking the truth; I belong to Christ and I do not lie.


From Paul, a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ.


But you must teach what agrees with sound doctrine.


Remind your people to submit to rulers and authorities, to obey them, and to be ready to do good in every way.